The Joe Rogan experience.
I was watching a talk that you were giving and you were talking about the,
the growth of innovation and technology and GDP over the last 100 years.
And you were talking about the entire history of life on earth and
what a short period of time humans have been here. And then what a,
and during what short period of time,
what a stunning amount of innovation and how much change we've enacted on
the earth and just a, a blink of an eye. And you had the scale of GDP,
mm-hmm, <affirmative> over, you know, the,
the course of the last a hundred years. It's, it's crazy to,
because it's so difficult for us with our current perspective,
just being a person and living going about the day to day life,
that seems so normal to put it in perspective time wise and see what an
enormous amount of change has taken place in relatively an incredibly short
amount of time. Yeah.
I mean, we,
we think of this as sort of the normal way for things to be that the,
the idea that the alarm way see up in the morning,
and then you commute in and sit in front of a computer all day and you try not
to eat too much. And, uh, and that if, if you sort of imagine that, oh, no,
maybe in 50 years or a hundred years, or at some point in the future,
it's gotta be very different. That's like some radical hypothesis,
but of course this quote unquote normal condition is a huge
anomaly and it, and it way you look at it. I mean,
if you look at it on geological timescale, the human species is very young. Um,
if you look at it historically, you know, for, you know, more than 90%,
we were just hunter gatherers running around and the agriculturalists for, and,
and the what, what, what the last couple of hundred years,
when some parts of the world have escaped the maltusian condition, where,
where you basically, um,
only have as much income as you need to be able to produce to children. Uh,
and we have the population exploit, like all of this is very, very, very recent,
um, and in, in space as well, of course, almost everything is ultra high vacuum.
And, and we live on the surface of this little special crumb. Mm.
Um, and, and yet we think this is normal and everything else is weird,
but I think that's a complete inversion. And so when you do plot,
if you do plot, for example, um, world GDP,
which is a kind of rough measure for the total amount of productive cable
ability that we have, right. Um,
if you plotted over 10,000 years, what,
what you see is just a flat line and then a, a vertical line,
and you can't really see any other structure. Like it's,
it's so extreme that the degree to which, um, humanities productive CAPA. So,
so if looks at this picture and we, no, now we imagine this is now the normal,
this is the way it's gonna be now indefinitely. It just can means a
PRI FESA impossibleible like, it, it sort of doesn't look like,
like we are in a static period right now. It,
it looks like this is we're in the middle of some kind of explosion.
Explosion. And, and oddly enough, everyone involved in the explosion,
everyone that's innovating everyone. That's creating all this new technology.
They're all a part of this momentum that was created before they were even born.
So it does feel normal.
They're just a part of this whole spinning machine. And they jump in,
they're born, they go to college. Next thing you know,
they have a job and they're contributing, they're making new technology.
And then more people jump in and add onto it.
And there's very little perspective in terms of like the historical significance
of this incredible explosion. Technologically,
when you look at what you're talking about, that C spike, no one feels it,
which is one of the weirdest things about it.
That, I mean, you kind of expect every year,
there will be a better iPhone or whatever, right. If not,
would be upset for almost all of human history, people lived and died.
And so absolutely no technological change. And in fact, you could have many,
many generations. Um,
the very idea that that was some trajectory in
the material conditions is, is a relatively new idea. I mean,
people thought of history either as, you know,
some kind of descent from a golden age or some people had a cyclical view,
but it was all in terms of political organization that would be great kingdom.
And then a wiseis ruler would rule for a while.
And then like a few hundred years later, you know,
their grand greatgrandchildren would be too greedy and it would come into
anarchy. And then, you know,
a few hundred years later it would come back together again. Yes. So,
so it would be all these kind of the pieces moving around. Right.
But no new pieces really entering, or if they did,
it was at such a slower rate that you didn't notice. Um,
but over the eons, you know, the, the wheel slowly turns and,
you know, somebody makes a slightly better wheel. Somebody figures out how to,
you know, irrigate slightly better day, they breed better crops. And, and, uh,
and eventually there is enough that you could have enough of a population, um,
enough brains that then create more ideas at the quick enough rate that you,
you get this industrial revolution. Um, and, uh,
and that's where we are now. I think.
Elon Musk had the most terrifying description of humanity said that we are the
biological boot loader for artificial intelligence.
Mm-hmm, <affirmative>.
That, that's what we're here.
For. Well, bootlers are important.
<Laugh> they are important. But I think, oh,
there there's like objectively, and there's personally like objectively,
if you were outside of the human race and you were looking at all these various
life forms competing, uh, on this planet for,
for resource and for survival, you would look at humanity and you'd go, well,
you know, clearly that's not, it's not finished,
so there's gonna be another version of it. It's like,
when is this version gonna take place?
Is it gonna take place over millions and millions of years?
Like it has historically when it comes to biological organisms or is it going
to invent something that takes over from there?
And then that's the new thing. Some something that's not based on tissue,
something that's not based on cells.
And doesn't have the biological limitations that we have,
nor nor does it have all the emotional attachments attachments to things like
breed, social dominance, hierarchies,
all those things are no consequence to it doesn't mean anything because it's not
biological.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I, I, I don't think millions of years, I mean,
number of decades or whatever, but,
but it's interesting that even if we set that aside,
we say machine intelligence is possible. For some reason,
let's just play with that. Then I still think that would be a very rapid change,
including biological change. And, um, um, I mean,
we are doing great advances, making great advances in biotech as well,
and will increasingly be able to control what our own
organisms are doing, um, through different means, um,
and enhance human capacities through biotechnology.
And so, so even there a lot is, is not gonna happen overnight,
but over an historically very short period of time, I,
I think you would still see quite profound change just from applying bioscience
to, to change human capacities. Yeah.
One of the technologies,
or one of the things that's been discussed to sort of mitigate the dangers of
artificial intelligence is a potential merge, um,
some sort of symbiotic relationship with technology that you, you see,
you hear discussed. Like, um,
I don't know exactly how Elon's rule link works,
but it seems like a step in that direction.
There's some sort of a brain implant that in that interacts with
an external device and this,
all of this increases the bandwidth for available intelligence and knowledge.
Yeah.
I'm, I'm sort of skeptical that that will work. I mean,
good <affirmative> that somebody tries it, you know, uh, but, um,
I think it's quite technically hard to improve
a normal, healthy human beings, uh,
say cognitive capacity or the capacities by implanting things in them, um,
and get benefits that you couldn't equally well get by having the GAT outside of
the body. Mm-hmm <affirmative> so, um, I,
I don't need to have an implant to be able to use Google. Right. I right.
And there are a lot of advantages to, to having it external, you,
you can kind of upgrade it very easily. You can shut it off because, well,
hopefully you could do that even with implant <laugh>. Um,
and once you start to look into the details, so there, so that of demos,
but then if you, if you actually look at the papers,
often you find wild and then there were these side effects and the person had
headaches, or they had some deficit and the speech, you know, like yes,
infection like this just biology is messy. Yes. Um, so,
um, you know, maybe it will work better than, than I expect that, that,
that could be good, but other, otherwise I think, um, that the,
the place where it will first become possible to enhance you of hu human
biological capacities, uh, would be through, um,
ethics selection, um, which is technologically, uh,
something very near do you.
Mean like CRISPR type.
Things? Well, so that would be editing right.
When you actually go in and change things that, that also is moving.
What do you, you mean by selection? Well,
so this would just be in the context of say in vitro fertilizization you have,
um,
usually some half dozen or dozen else created during this fertility
procedure, which is standardly used.
So rather than just the doctor kind of looking at these embryos and saying,
well, that one looks healthy, or I'm gonna implant that, uh, you,
you could run some genetic test and then use that as a predictor and select
the one you think has the, the Mo the most desirable attributes.
And so this could be a trend in terms of how human beings reproduce that we,
instead of just randomly having sex woman gets pregnant,
gives birth to a child. We don't know what it's gonna be,
what it's what's gonna happen.
We just hope that it's a good kid instead of that,
you start looking at the, all the various components that we can measure.
Yeah. Uh, and so, I mean, to some extent, we already do this.
There are a lot of, um, testing done, um, um,
for various chmosomal abnormalities that you can already check for, but,
but our ability to, uh,
to look beyond clear stark diseases that Ongen is wrong. Like,
like to look at more complex trait is, is, is increasing rapidly. Um,
so obviously there are a lot of ethical issues and different view that come into
that. But if I, if you're just talking, what is technologicalically feasible? I,
I think that, that, I mean, already,
you could do a very limited amount of that today, and maybe you would get,
you know,
two or three ICU points in expectation more if you selected using current
technology based on 10 embryos, let's say so very small, but,
but as genomics, uh,
gets better at deciphering the genetic architecture of complex
traits, whether it's intelligence or, or personality attributes than, than you,
you would have more select power and you could do more. And,
and then there is a number of other technologies we don't yet have,
but which if you did, would then kind of stack with that and,
and enable much more powerful forms of, of enhancement. Um,
so, so, so there, uh, yeah, I don't think there are, and,
and a major technological hurdles really in, in the way,
just some small amount of incremental father improvement.
That's when you talk about
doing something with genetics and human beings and
selecting, selecting for the superior versions.
And then if everybody starts doing that, the ethical concerns, when,
when you start discussing that people get very nervous.
Cause they start to look at their own genetic defects and they go, oh my God,
what if I didn't make the cut? Yeah. Like I wouldn't be here.
And you start thinking about all the imperfect people that have actually
contributed in some pretty spectacular ways yeah. To what our culture is.
And like, well, what if everybody has perfect genes,
would all these things even take place? Like, what are we doing really,
if we're bypassing nature and we're choosing to select for the traits
and the attributes that we find to be the most positive and attractive,
like what are like that? And.
You take what, what would've happened.
If say some earlier age had had this ability to kind of
lock in their yes. You know, their, their, their prejudice or,
um, if Victorians had had this sure. Maybe it would all be, uh,
whatever Pius and patriotic now or something. Yeah. We know like another. Yeah.
So, um, so, so in, in general,
with all of these powerful technologies, we, we are developing there.
There is like,
I think the ideal course would be that we would first gain a bit more wisdom and
then we would get all of these powerful tools. Um,
but it looks like we're getting the powerful tools before we have really, uh,
achieved a very high level of waste them. Yeah. And so.
But we haven't earned them. The people that are using them are sort of we're,
we haven't like thing about the, the technology that all of us use. How many,
how many pieces of technology do you use in a day and how much do you actually
understand any of those?
Most people have very little understanding of any of the thing,
things they use work. They put no effort at all into creating those things,
but yet they've inherited the responsibility of the power that those things
possess.
Yeah. I mean that, that's the only way we, we can do it. Uh,
it is just way too complex for any person. If,
if you had to sort of learn how to build everything, every tool you use,
like you wouldn't get very far.
Isn't that fascinating though,
when you think about human beings and all the different things we do,
we have very little understanding of the mechanisms behind most of what
we need for day to day life. Yet we just use them because there's so many of us.
And so many people are understanding various parts of all these different things
that together collectively we can utilize intelligence of all these millions of
people that have innovated. And we with no work whatsoever,
just go into the Verizon store and pick up the new phone. Yeah.
I mean, and not just technology,
but worldviews and political ideas as well.
It's not as if most people sit down, uh,
with an empty table, try to think from the basic principles up,
what would be the ideal configuration of the state or something like that. Yeah.
You just kind of absorb it and go with it, float in the stream of culture. Yeah.
And, uh, and, and it,
it's amazing just how little of that actually at any point channels through your
sort of conscious attention where you make some rational, otherwise,
but likeliberate a decision most, you just get carried away with. Um,
so, but, but that, that again, I mean, if, if we have, if,
if this is what we have to work with, then I there's no other way.
There's no other.
Way possib <laugh>, it's, there's no other way. And there's no way,
even like you now discussing this,
like discussing the, the,
the history of this incredible spike of evolution, uh, or,
or innovation rather in technology,
it Fe it just doesn't feel like anything. It feels normal.
So even though we can intellectualize it,
even though we can have this conversation and talk about what an incredible time
we're in and how terrifying it is that things are moving at such an incredibly
rapid rate. And no one, no one's putting the brakes on it. No,
one's thinking about the, the potential pros and cons. We're just pushing ahead.
Yeah. Well.
Not nobody not. I mean, there are a few people I've got my research group. Yes.
There's actually increase. I mean, when I,
I got interested in these things in the nineties and it was very much a fringe,
uh, activity. There was some internet mailing list on people exchanging ideas,
but, but over since then, I mean, there's now a small
set of academic research institutes and some other that are kind of actually
trying to do more systematic thinking about some of these big picture topics.